---
title: "The nice thing about standards is that you have so many to choose from."
date: 2021-7-6
---

**[This blog post has time travelled.  It is from a previous blog that predates the very existence of this one.]**

Being the Internet, I should probably attribute that to either Mark
Twain or Abraham Lincoln (and in fact, Google and Bing give dozens of
people who supposedly said it), but it's from Andrew Tannenbaum's
Computer Networking textbook that I used when I was in college, and
seems to be original with him.

My "standard of the day" is Markdown. If you're not familiar with it,
it's basically "HTML lite" -- a way of writing documentation by
specifying the function, rather than the format, of each textual
element, and then it gets magically massaged into something that looks
good. It's very lightweight, very broadly supported, and you can learn
it in about fifteen minutes (for example, look here:
https://www.markdownguide.org/cheat-sheet/). It makes up the baseline
documentation format for many blog tools (including this one, although I
haven't figured out how to turn it on, yet), GitHub, most modern Wikis,
and the internal documentation systems of both Android and Apple.
Apple's recent WWDC had a number of sessions on their flavor, called
DocC, that's basically the future of formatting for them (even for
in-code comments, which is pretty slick, actually). As a baseline
documentation language, it serves roughly the same function for
technical writers as C does for developers: what you use might not be
exactly the same, but you can bet it's heavily influenced by it.

But--as with C-like languages--"flavor" is the right word. John Gruber
invented it in 2004 or so, and the basics haven't changed much. But all
it really does is give you formatting of lists in various ways, headings
and outlines, paragraphs, internal and external links, and the sort of
basic "emphasis" technologies like italics and boldface.

Which is actually sort of a nice feature: it basically removes the
emphasis from *formatting* back to *content*. But there's a lot of ways
of presenting information, some of which are pretty standard: footnotes,
references, tables, various types of "code" blocks, and the like. So
lots of systems have "extended" it in various ways, and not all of those
are compatible with each other. So when someone tells you to write in
Markdown, "Which one?" is not an unreasonable question.

Probably the de-facto winner in the Markdown war is "Github Flavored
Markdown," (https://github.github.com/gfm/) just because of its
centrality to one of the most common developer tools on the web. So if
that same someone responds to your question with "Uh, I don't know?" GFM
is a good baseline assumption. Github also has a backend system called
Github Pages that allows you to add structured Markdown files to your
Github projects (or just to your Github account), and it will render
them using its "Jekyll" rendering engine.

Looking into technologies for a potential writing project, a former boss
of mine pointed me at Docsify (https://docsify.js.org/#/), which is a
replacement for Jekyll that does a little more stuff: in particular, it
supports custom sidebars/guides, renders the markdown into HTML on
demand (rather than requiring a compiling step), and is *also* supported
by Github Pages. Even better, if you fuss with it a little bit, you can
use Mermaid (https://mermaid-js.github.io/mermaid/#/) in code blocks,
which gives you a near-magical ability to create the various charts
(Gantt, Flow, Sequence Diagram, etc.) that make up the technical
documenter's nightmares, using a language so simple you can teach it to
pretty much anybody who understands what the charts are supposed to
represent.

I've been playing with this a bit on a GitHub project for terrain
generation in the Unity game engine. You can see the documentation as it
gets written here: <https://ckempke.github.io/UnityTerrainGeneration/#/>
